The naming conventions for the Central Processing Unit is as follows; for intel: Intel Core i9-14900. In the case of Intel, the 'i' followed by either a 3, 5, 7, or 9 describes its core set. An i3 is the cheapest and has the least amount of cores while the i9 is the most expensive and highest performance. The next part is after the dash, in this case the 14900. The first two numbers in that string describe the CPU's generation. This is the 14th generation of the Intel Core processors. The next part, the 900 describes its performance. again the higher the number the more processing power it is capable of. There is also sometimes a letter at the end which describes a specific function. a 'K' would mean the clock speed is higher than normal. 'G' shows it has a built-in GPU. 'T' is for power saving chips. and finally 'F' means the model requires a specific GPU to work properly.
AMD uses a similar naming convention: AMD Ryzen 7 9850X. Similar to Intel we can break the number down into parts. Ryzen is the series much like Intel's "Core" line. First number, this case '7' refers to its power, the higher the number the better the chip. The numbers are also 3, 5, 7, and 9. The next chunk is the first number of 9850X3D, or 9000. That shows its generation, meaning the 9850 is part of the 9000-series. The next part, the 850 gives a better detail on its power. The larger the number the better. Therefore, a 9500 would be more affordable but less powerful than a 9850. and the last letter can show similar effects of the Intel, like the 'X' in this example shows that it has an extended frequency range. 
CPUs are  graded on its clock speed and IPC. Clock speed represents how many cycles the CPU can execute per second. the higher the speed, the more operations can be performed per second. while an IPC, or Instructions per Cycle is the average number of instructions per cycle. So, a lower clock speed but a higher IPC will mean a faster chip.
When looking at what Processor to choose there are a few things to consider.The main things to consider are the everyday usage of this PC, its cooling requirements, and finally the size of the motherboard or tower. Looking at usage, What is the builder going to use this pc for? Will it be a desktop for business and web surfing? Will it be used for intensive video games? or will it be used for 3-D modeling, mapping, and CAD? Will you be running a small amount of intensive programs or a large number of lesser intensive programs? Say you decide to make a desktop for at home finances and e-mail. a desktop for business use and reading emails would be perfectly fine with a small number of cores and a lower performance since the usage won't be intense. A gaming PC may want a higher number of cores but might be fine with a lower performance. and finally a 3-D modeling or animation would be better off with a lower number of cores but a higher performance, although this example would benefit from a highest rated CPU.
Next is cooling requirements. Thermal Design Power is the power consumption at default clock speeds. Power consumption is less than the TDP since it is the maximum load the system should be designed for. Nowadays, TDP is within its specifications. So when looking at cooling systems, either airflow or liquid, you should look at the posted TDP, say 50W, the cooling system should be able to withstand at least 50W.
Moving onto the motherboard. Going over some of the sockets and slots. Notice how no matter the manufacturer, the motherboards are standardized; the CPU goes in the middle, USB panel goes on the back, RAM is located together. The way things clip and connect is also standardized, this is called the ATX standard. The CPU socket is usually one of two types, either the AM4 socket, which fits Intel CPUs, or the AM5, which is the standard for AMD CPUs. There are two power connectors. one for the motherboard, which will be a 20+4pin input. The CPU will have its own dedicated socket, ranging from 4+4pin to 8+8pin. PCIe slots have different sizes, x1, x4, x8, and x16. Graphics cards are usually x16 while the other sizes can be used for other peripherals like sound cards, wifi adapters, and SSD drives to name a few. The front panel connectors are used for ports and buttons on the front of the case. SATA ports are the standard for your hard drives, SSDs, and optical drives. and finally there are the M.2 slots. These can be either SATA or PCIe. they take up some of the data speeds off their respective socket to run what is plugged in, usually a second SSD. The I/O panel is the panel in the back that consists of all the ports like USB, HDMI, and Ethernet. 
Choosing to overclock is an important topic when choosing a motherboard. when one overclocks they increase power which increases heat. you need to make sure your motherboard is geared towards it. Intel series chipsets will have a 'Z' or 'X' at the front of the series name while AMD uses 'B' or 'x' 
RAM consists of DDR3, DDR4, and DDR5. Not only do the slots have different speeds, they are also incompatible with each other's chip. A DDR4 will not fit into a DDR5. Another thing to look at is its clockspeed and CAS latency. clock speeds define, in MHz, how fast the memory transfers from the RAM to the CPU. the higher the better. DDR4 runs at 3200MHz, while DDR5 will go to 600MHz or higher. Now, CAS latency is the timing value that's programmed into the RAM. This is essentially how fast your RAM responds to your CPU.
There are many sizes of motherboards and that is dictated by the size of your tower, or case. The most common size is just ATX, it's also the middle ground for motherboards, not the smallest but also not the biggest. Most of the time these will have at least 4 RAM slots, different PCIe sockets at variable sizes, and up to 4 M.2 slots. Next is the Micro ATX, this is smaller than the ATX, since they are smaller, less wide, they are used for smaller or slimmer towers. They tend to have less slots than their bigger counterparts; a CPU socket, 4 RAM slots, a single PCIe and M.2 slot. Mini ITX is the smallest size, they are designed to be as small as needed so will only have 2 RAM slots, the CPU socket and a single PCIe and M.2 slot. These are slightly more expensive than the micro-ATX. Finally, we have the eATX. this will be the biggest possible. They are the same length as the ATX but much wider. they will have the most slots as well as the highest power to boost. Some even come with their own heatsinks for their m.2 slots.
GPU stands for Graphics Processing Unit. GPUs are often called graphics cards or video cards. An integrated GPU, or iGPU, is built into the CPU, while a dedicated GPU, dGPU, or discrete GPU is a separate unit that plugs into the motherboard’s PCIe slot.
The two leading GPU manufacturers are NVIDIA and AMD. Intel also makes integrated GPUs for their processors, and has begun making dedicated GPUs with the Arc lineup released in 2022.
Workstation GPUs are specialized for precise rendering and reliability, and generally intended for industry use.
NVIDIA has GeForce graphics cards for consumers, mostly marketed toward PC gamers, and Quadro graphics cards designed for workstation use. GeForce graphics cards currently follow a naming scheme with a four-digit number where the thousands digit denotes the generation, and the tens digit represents the performance level within the generation. For instance, a GeForce GTX 1070 is more powerful (but more expensive) than a GTX 1060. Some NVIDIA cards have a suffix denoting a more powerful variant of the card: either Ti or Super, for example, the GTX 1050 Ti or the RTX 3080 Super. The RTX prefix is used for GPUs that are capable of ray tracing, a technique for simulating realistic 3-D lighting. The GTX prefix is for older cards or those without hardware ray tracing capabilities. As of February 2026, the current generation is the RTX 50 series, or 5000 series. The most powerful GPU is 5090, and the other products are the RTX 5080, 5070 Ti, 5070, 5060 Ti, 5060, and 5050, in order of descending performance and price.
AMD has Radeon RX graphics cards for gaming, and Radeon Pro cards for workstations. Radeon RX graphics cards now follow a similar naming scheme to NVIDIA. The current generation as of February 2026 is the RX 9000 series. The GPUs listed in descending performance are the 9070 XT, 9070, 9060 XT, and 9060. The XT denotes a more powerful variant of that tier of GPU. The Radeon RX 9070 XT is roughly comparable to a GeForce 5070 or a 5070 Ti in raster performance, but AMD’s cards still fall behind in ray tracing performance.
Intel’s GPUs are competitive due to their low price; they are a strong option when compared to lower end NVIDIA or AMD cards like the RTX 5050. Intel does not produce GPUs that compete with high end cards. Since Intel has recently begun producing discrete GPUs, their drivers had more bugs and performance varied widely across applications and games. However, the drivers have been rapidly improving in the past couple years.
GPUs have a clock speed and core count similar to CPUs, but these correspond to real-world performance much less clearly, so benchmarks are required to judge a GPU’s overall speed. GPUs also have different amounts of VRAM, which is memory built onto the GPU exclusively used for storing graphics-related data like textures. Some chips are sold with different VRAM amounts; for instance there is an RTX 3060 8GB and an RTX 3060 12GB model.
While AMD and NVIDIA manufacture the GPU chip, many GPUs are produced by Add-In-Board (AIB) partners, who make the GPU cooling solution and PCB around the chip, and may customize the GPU with extra features or a factory overclock. NVIDIA and AMD also sell their own models, which NVIDIA calls “Founder’s Edition”.
The size and shape of the GPU heatsink and fans can vary. Cases will have expansion slots in the back, which the GPU will be screwed into. These slots allow the user to access the GPU’s ports (usually HDMI and DisplayPort) externally on the back of the case. GPUs usually occupy 2 slots, but more recently, high end GPUs have thicker heatsinks and thus occupy 3 or even 4 slots of space. Users should make sure their case supports the length, width, and depth of their GPU.
The most common monitor resolutions are 1080p (1920x1080), 1440p (2560x1440), and 4K (3840x2160). 1080p is also called Full HD, 1440p is sometimes called QHD (Quad HD), and 4K is also called UHD (Ultra HD). All three of these resolutions are a 16:9 aspect ratio. There are also ultrawide monitors with 21:9 or 32:9 aspect ratios. Higher resolutions will require more graphics processing power to run at the same framerate. Framerate is measured in FPS (frames per second), but monitors can only update at a set interval, called the refresh rate, measured in Hz (which is effectively equivalent to frames per second). 60 Hz monitors are most common, but 120 Hz, 144 Hz, or even higher is often preferred for games, especially competitive eSports titles. Monitors, in particular LCDs, also have different display technologies: TN is the cheapest and offers the highest refresh rates, but sacrifices color quality and contrast, VA is cheap and has good contrast but can suffer from ghosting (a type of visual artifact), IPS is more expensive but has good color accuracy. There are also OLED monitors which are very expensive but provide very high contrast and vivid colors, since pixels are independently lit, unlike the other types of displays which are backlit. There are also other specifications like response time, which may affect how clearly rapidly moving or changing images are displayed, or color gamut, which refers to the range of colors the monitor can display.
A big PC Case allows for plenty of room for drives, large graphics cards, and maximum-size motherboards.
Smaller cases fit into constrained-space environments or entertainment centers.
The case you choose is intertwined with your motherboard choice and sometimes your PC’s power supply.
Cases usually come in traditional tower shape and midtower shape, usually between 15 and 22 inches tall.
Flatter desktop cases are designed to lie on their sides.
Highly compact cases are built for minimalist configurations.
Your PC case can dictate the parts you select.
Every PC case lists the motherboard format it supports.
The three main PC cases layouts for a motherboard are ATX (full-size, mainstream motherboard), MicroATX (smaller with fewer expansion slots and other surface-area-related features), and Mini-ITX, (even smaller, usually just a single slot for a video card), XL-ATX and EATX, which are bigger than ATX.
Most cases that support a given motherboard format will also allow smaller ones—most ATX cases, for example, can accept MicroATX and Mini-ITX motherboards.
Match your case's size class with your motherboard so you're not wasting space.
Materials vary widely, from steel, black hue steel, tempered glass.
Cases with one or more tempered-glass sides have become very popular and affordable for additional flair to show off internal hardware.
It's possible these days to purchase PC components that complement a case's interior or exterior.
Some CPU chips tend to run hot, and you'll likely want a liquid cooling system rather than just a heatsink or fan for this processor.
Electronic components like the CPU and GPU can generate significant heat during operation, so if there is no efficient heat management without proper cooling, they can overheat.
Overheating can lead to performance degradation, instability, or permanent damage.
Effective cooling systems, such as computer fans, regulate the PC's temperature for optimal performance and hardware longevity.
During intensive tasks like gaming, excessive heat can cause thermal throttling, where the system is pulling back on performance to prevent permanent damage.
Liquid and air cooling are the primary types of cooling for gaming PCs.
Air cooling uses a combination of heat sinks and fans to function.
Liquid systems rely on radiators and water to stay cool.
Liquid cooling systems are among the most effective. They use a liquid coolant with high thermal conductivity to efficiently dissipate heat.
A liquid cooling setup typically includes: Water blocks (optional),Pump,Radiator,Tubes, Reservoir (in some cases).
The pump circulates the coolant through the system, so the heat moves away from the CPU via the water block. The heated liquid coolant then cycles to the radiator, where it cools down before it begins recirculation.
All-in-one (AIO) coolers and custom loops are the two types of liquid cooling systems.
All-in-one (AIO) coolers are pre-assembled units that function similarly to air coolers, offering easy installation and maintenance.
Custom loop systems allow for personalized configurations, enabling users to optimize performance and aesthetics according to their preferences.
Liquid cooling is best for gamers and overclockers needing superior thermal performance.
Liquid coolers use thermally conductive fluids such as distilled water and other chemicals to prevent microbial growth. This results in more efficient heat removal and better handling of thermal loads.
Air cooling is a cost-effective and reliable computer cooling system, particularly for the CPU.
Utilizing a combination of fans and heatsinks, air cooling systems efficiently dissipate thermal energy, making them an excellent choice for newcomers to PC building and those on a budget.
cooling process begins with the CPU generating heat, which is transferred from its Integrated Heat Spreader (IHS) through a layer of thermal paste to a conductive baseplate, typically made of copper or aluminum.
The baseplate connects to heat pipes, conducting heat to a heatsink. The heatsink is elevated off the motherboard to save space for other components like RAM. This hardware consists of thin metal fins, maximizing exposure to cooler air.
An attached fan then pushes air over the heatsink, absorbing heat from the metal and expelling warm air away from the CPU.
The effectiveness of air cooling systems varies based on their materials as well as the size and number of fans attached to the CPU heatsink.
Air coolers are favored for their simplicity in maintenance and installation along with their lower cost compared to liquid cooling systems. They are ideal for gamers who do not intend to overclock their systems or prioritize aesthetics.
Fans are crucial in air cooling systems. Fans ensure that heat generated by various components efficiently dissipates to maintain optimal performance and prevent overheating.
Different fans target specific elements within a computer, each contributing to the overall cooling strategy.
Case Fans are installed in the computer case and circulate air throughout the enclosure.
CPU Fans are typically mounted directly on top of the CPU and work in conjunction with a heatsink. The heatsink absorbs heat from the CPU and then dissipates it with the help of the fan.
GPU Fans often have powerful processors that generate substantial heat, so these fans effectively manage this heat, preventing performance degradation and potential damage.
Fans are integral to any PC setup and are even used in liquid cooling systems to keep the coolant at the ideal temperature.
Operating Systems, also known as kernels, are software that manage a computer’s hardware, provides a basis for application programs, and acts as an intermediary between the user and the hardware.
Windows OS is user friendly and compatible with most devices, but has poor security, needs a license from Microsoft to use (which is expensive), any application software running on it has to be paid, and has poor technical support. Because of this, Windows should particularly be used for either gaming of business.
Linux OS is more secure than Windows OS, allows for greater customization, is more stable and reliable, and free to boot. However, it can have a higher learning curve, and is less compatible with other softwares and hardwares. Because of this Linux should particularly be used for programming or servers.
Solid-state disks are disk-drive like storage devices that use flash-memory-based nonvolatile memory.
SSDs can read, write, and store data much faster than HDDs, while HDDs have more storage capacity and are cheaper.
Between SATA and NVMe, SATA SSDs (depending on the form factor) will have a read/write speed between 300 to 600 MB/s, while NVMe SSDs will have a read/write speed between 1000 to 3500 MB/s.
Between QLC (Quad-Level Cell), TLC (Triple-Level Cell), and MLC (Multi-Level Cell) SSDs; QLC is considered the cheapest option and has the highest capacity of data storage, but has the worst speed and performance; MLC has the best speed and the longest lasting performance, but has the least data storage and is the most expensive; TLC fits in the middle of the two with a balanced mix of performance, storage capacity and cost effectiveness.
In terms of form factor, the 3.5” SSD has the most storage capacity and arguably the cheapest, but consumes the most power; the 2.5” SSD has lower power consumption and better performance, but costs more and has less capacity; the m.2 SSD is the fastest and consumes the least power, but also costs the most and has the least storage capacity.
